*Why a Worker-First Software Cooperative?*

*(RFD #2, Untitled Co-op)*

“[T]he political realm rises directly out of acting together, the
‘sharing of words and deeds.’” Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, p.
198

[arabic]
. {blank}
+
____
Introduction
____

A small group of founders develops some groundbreaking technology in a
garage. They attract investors who provide funds to scale the business
in return for significant ownership stakes. This revolutionary
enterprise then upends established incumbents, dominates the market, and
becomes enormously profitable. The investors reap huge gains upon exit,
and the founders, while not as enriched as the investors in absolute
terms, still do extremely well — perhaps even well enough to retire
early. Early employees also fare quite well.

For those concerned about the immense wealth inequalities in the U.S., a
problem with this model is that everyone else does not share in this
prosperity. While tech workers _tend_ to be on the high__ish__ end of
the income distribution, it is often argued that the original vision was
not theirs, they did not risk much at the beginning, and so later
workers should not expect payouts comparable to those of the founders
and very early hires. The system is working, one might say.

[arabic, start=2]
. {blank}
+
____
The Critical Importance of Integrated Decision-Making
____

Before getting into why the system is actually _not_ working, and how
maybe to fix some of it, we highlight a lesson from early American
business history: the principle of integrated decision-making. This
means that the same people who will execute decisions must be deeply
involved in making them.footnote:[Kenneth Hopper and William Hopper, The
Puritan Gift: Reclaiming the American Dream Amidst Global Financial
Chaos. I.B. Tauris, 2007 at 25.] This is not the same as democratic
voting. The Puritan settlers of Massachusetts Bay succeeded because they
spent months meticulously planning their migration before deciding
whether to proceed, with those who would implement plans being integral
to their development. They studied past failures, conducted pilot
projects, and made detailed contingency plans. Their success contrasted
sharply with failed settlements that made high-level decisions first and
worked out details later. This means:

* {blank}
+
____
Decisions cannot be made "in principle" and handed off to others for
implementation
____
* {blank}
+
____
Democratic voting is preceded by detailed planning by those who would
execute
____
* {blank}
+
____
Every major initiative needs pilot testing before full deployment
____
* {blank}
+
____
Study both successes and failures in similar efforts
____
* {blank}
+
____
Maintain adequate reserves for contingencies
____

For a software organization, integrated decision-making could manifest
as "mob programming" (also known as ensemble programming or software
teaming), which is an engineering method explored by the Mob Mentality
Show (and
others).footnote:[<https://www.youtube.com/@mobmentalityshow[[.underline]#https://www.youtube.com/@mobmentalityshow#]>.
See also Woody Zuill & Kevin Meadows, Software Teaming: A Mob
Programming, Whole-Team Approach. 2022.] This method involves the entire
team working together at a single workstation (physical or virtual), by
rotating through specific roles, primarily the 'typer' (or 'driver') who
operates the keyboard and the 'talker' (or 'navigator') who guides the
implementation. Other team members actively participate through
observation and discussion, creating a fluid, collaborative environment.
(We will explore in Sections 17 and 18 how the mob/ensemble practice
might extend beyond code to diverse aspects of business operations.)

Consider a team implementing a feature to import data from Excel files.
During a session, team members cycle through different roles: typing,
talking, watching what the typer is doing, or listening to what the
talker is saying to the typer. The team includes people who regularly
work across different aspects of software development - testing,
operations, architecture, coding - as these aren't separate roles but
different facets of the work that any team member might engage in.

While the session is happening, each person focuses intently on their
current role rather than trying to actively contribute from their
specialty. Yet their diverse perspectives - architectural design,
security, database optimization, systems operations - subtly inform how
they engage with the code, often in ways that aren't verbalized in the
moment.

For instance, a security specialist probably would _not_ point out
vulnerabilities while typing, navigating, or listening (because their
attention would be on the task at hand). Instead, their security mindset
influences how they understand and work with the code. These different
perspectives and their influence on the work might only become apparent
during the end-of-day retrospective, or even the next day after team
members have had time to process what they learned.

The mob programming practice could become particularly powerful when
applied to new initiatives through a two-stage Minimum Viable Product
(MVP) process. If workers were to propose a new system or process, they
would first secure democratic approval to allocate hours for MVP
development. These hours would come from their existing work time - no
specialized positions would be created. The same people proposing the
system would build it, ensuring that those who conceive an idea are also
those who will implement it. After MVP development, they would
demonstrate the working system to the general membership for a second
vote on whether to scale it. This pattern of concrete demonstration
followed by collective evaluation provides a reality-check against
unnecessary complexity. When people must show rather than just tell, and
when they must implement their own proposals rather than hand them off
to others, potential sources of bureaucratic bloat are naturally
prevented. And when questions about security, usability, or performance
arose, the relevant experts would have been immersed in the code's
evolution.

The ensemble work pattern may be a way to restore the primacy of clear
communication, explainability, and dependability. The “Great Engine”
companies - DuPont, General Motors, AT&T, IBM and others that dominated
mid-20th century American industry - achieved this through hierarchical
structures, but modern communication technologies enable new
possibilities. Tools like Zulip's threaded discussions and Oxide's
Request for Discussion (RFD) system can create persistent, searchable
channels for decision-making and organizational memory, while mob
programming sessions provide real-time integration of knowledge and
capability. Together, these can potentially achieve what hierarchy
historically provided - clear information flow, effective coordination,
dependability, and explainability - but in a more democratic and
distributed way.

However, such a project should avoid McCallum's error at the Erie
Railroad of trying to engineer human judgment out of the system. The
goal is not to create a perfect system that runs automatically, but
rather to enable human judgment to function effectively at scale. We are
trying to describe a plausible future, and our first guess at how to
achieve it, in light of the facts. When the facts change, we try to
realize that they changed, and change our beliefs. The technology, or at
very least the technology primitives, in principle already enable new
forms of organization; the bigger challenge is probably social.

The ensemble/mob practice emerged from experimental work at Hunter
Industries in the early 2010s, where teams discovered that working
together continuously led to better design, better code, fewer defects,
and more engaged developers.footnote:[Zuill, Woody, and Kevin Meadows.
"Mob programming: A whole team approach." Agile 2014 Conference,
Orlando, Florida. Vol. 3. 2016.
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241002162129/https://www.agilealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/ExperienceReport.2014.Zuill_.pdf>]
Rather than the traditional cycle of individual work followed by code
review, mob programming enables continuous review and improvement. This
real-time collaboration often prevents problems that would be costly to
fix later. It also encourages a state of "team flow", where a group
works smoothly togetherfootnote:[Zuill & Meadows, 2022 at 163.],
addressing issues as they arise and making decisions in real-time.

Mob programming directly implements the principles of integrated
decision-making:

* {blank}
+
____
Decisions cannot be separated from implementation - they happen
simultaneously
____
* {blank}
+
____
Every major initiative undergoes continuous pilot testing as the team
works (e.g. via “Test Driven Development”)
____
* {blank}
+
____
The ensemble studies both successes and failures in real-time
____
* {blank}
+
____
The team maintains shared context about decisions and their implications
____

This practice could form the foundation for many aspects of enterprise
operations, from software development to financial planning to
governance.

[arabic, start=3]
. {blank}
+
____
The Problem with Wealth Super-Inequality in Tech
____

The insiders who became extraordinarily wealthy in the Introduction were
not proportionately instrumental to the business's success. To be fair,
they were _somewhat_ more responsible. And if not for their founding,
the business probably would not exist, nor, quite possibly, would any
analog. But this historical contingency does not mean the
founders/insiders are infinitely more responsible than employee number
11,781. They are not even 20-fold more (pro rata) responsible. It is not
that the insiders' remuneration is unearned, but rather that their
_exorbitant_ remuneration is unearned. Not all, but _most_ of their
excess fortune has no justification other than them having been in the
right place at the right time. Early-life decisions — whether of a
company, a career, or a mammal — are generally more consequential than
later ones; timing often outweighs who is making the decision or the
singular flair with which they made it.

Some argue that without the lure of huge rewards and the taking of huge
risks, the economy would not be as successful and productive as it is. I
do not buy this. Why should we incentivize anyone to risk personal
bankruptcy? There are more humane ways to encourage people to
experiment.footnote:[Such as funding more five-year graduate
fellowships. Their humaneness is a mixed bag, depending greatly on the
local academic environs, but their stipends typically cover basic living
expenses. Stipulating and enforcing portability for such fellowships
could significantly improve working conditions for early-career
researchers.] Without exorbitant rewards, people might pull fewer
all-nighters, yes. We might have fewer celebrity CEOs. "Shark Tank"
might have a smaller viewership. But these are not meaningful proxies
for, or contributors to, success or productivity or innovation. There is
nothing wrong with occasionally staying up all night, but making it a
habit is almost always unwise — and pressuring others to do so, even
indirectly through cultural norms that celebrate such behavior, is
thoroughly stupid. Grinding boosts short-term productivity — but harms
it in the long term.footnote:[Unless, of course, we expand our
definition of 'productivity' to include the medical goods and services
employed to treat the chronic and acute health issues caused by the
"grind culture" imposed upon workers. More concretely, if a worker has a
heart attack, that is easily an extra $10,000 of 'productivity' due to
the medevac alone!] Exorbitant rewards both exacerbate inequality and
encourage overwork.

[arabic, start=4]
. {blank}
+
____
Challenging the Winner-Take-All Mindset
____

The problem with this __uber-capitalist__footnote:[See It’s OK to be
Angry About Capitalism by Bernie Sanders, 2023] bias is not only that
disproportionately rewarding first movers is unnecessary, unfair, and
unhealthy. This incentive structure also perpetuates cults of
personality and authoritarian dynamics. It normalizes a
_winner-take-all_ mindset, which in turn drives a _win-at-all-costs_
mindset. For if the winner takes all, the losers are left with nothing.
As Peter Thiel infamously observed, competition is the last thing
capitalists wantfootnote:[Peter Thiel, Competition is for Losers, Wall
Street Journal. 12 Sept 2014.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-losers-1410535536].
They seek moats, monopolies, monopsonies, and chokepointsfootnote:[Cory
Doctorow & Rebecca Giblin, Chokepoint Capitalism: How Big Tech and Big
Content Captured Creative Labor Markets and How We'll Win Them Back.
2022, Beacon Press.] — maximizing profit and minimizing
effort.footnote:[That said, as Frederic S. Lee demonstrates in Heterodox
Microeconomics (2017), a fine line often exists between predatory or
abusive pricing behavior and the practices firms use in reasonable
market governance to sustain themselves as going concerns — a topic we
will revisit in sections 6, 8, 18, and 19.]

Relentless winner-take-all growth is unhealthy. Meanwhile, immense
wealth is not even a great incentive for the next big thing. The
possibility of immense wealth might have helped give us our tech
darlings, but it also gave us our tech deplorables, like Theranos and
FTX. Good ideas are not a finite resource, nor do people get bored of
creating them. Winner-take-all might have summoned impressive individual
efforts in the past, but that does not mean it was the only or best way.
Think, for example, of separate clinical and preclinical tests in
separate corporate silos proceeding and failing — independently, in
isolation, and in ignorance.[multiblock footnote omitted] This
inefficiency is exacerbated by the current patent system and
financialization of the pharmaceutical industry, which often prioritize
short-term financial gains over long-term innovation and public health
outcomes. These systemic inefficiencies in pharmaceutical innovation are
signs of deeper and broader pathologies in how we approach complex
global issues. With 1.5 °C of warming baked into the climate cake, we
must today rise to an occasion piled far higher with difficulty than we
have been past accustomed to.

We see evidence of the winner-take-all mentality in, e.g., the Microsoft
portfolio of companies and their business models, as well as in the
licensing and trademark-related behavior of other software companies and
cloud providers such as[multiblock footnote omitted] HashiCorp, MongoDB,
Amazon AWS, Elastic, and Redis. In the case of Microsoft, the bare facts
of (1) a large ownership stake in OpenAI, (2) full ownership of GitHub,
and (3) what seems an unfathomably large subscriber base for Office 365
from US Federal agencies (not to mention the private sector) should be
sufficient to dismay any advocate of software freedom, individual
privacy, and healthy competition. More explicitly: if you are bothered
that companies like Google and Amazon use your browsing, searching, and
purchasing habits to try to sell you more stuff, just wait until
companies start deploying Large Language Models (LLMs) for similar (or
worse) purposes. Have you seen how quickly ChatGPT can generate an
accurate summary of a book-length document? Imagine this capability
deployed at scale and pointed at not just analyses of keywords and URL
visit patterns, but rather the actual semantic content of the sites we
visit and the ideas we type.

GitHub is a fabulous and extremely useful tool. And currently, it plays
a valuable societal role in affording software commons. However,
anything that gets publicly committed to GitHub is fair game for OpenAI
to leverage in improving its LLMs; when combined with OpenAI’s formal
partnership with GitHub Copilot, it is difficult to regard OpenAI’s
relationship to GitHub data as anything less than one of privilege. This
is the sort of “moat” or “flywheel” that venture capitalists love. It is
a self-reinforcing process that situates GitHub and OpenAI as the
platforms of choice due to their superior adoption and training data.
However, with apologies to George R. R. Martin, this particular
flywheel, which answers mostly to oligarchs and their sycophants, needs
breaking rather than turning.footnote:[In the hybridized spirit of
idealism and pragmatism that this RFD hopefully embodies, the PR for
this RFD is a “cross-post” of the one hosted in the Codeberg repo. The
idealist part is that the primary repo is with Codeberg; the pragmatic
part is that I have made no attempt at some sort of automated
integration of the two separate discussion spaces.]

[arabic, start=5]
. {blank}
+
____
A Hypothetical Software Cooperative
____

A new software cooperative could initially organize itself around
principles of a worker-first second-degree cooperativefootnote:[Also
known as a _second-order_ cooperative, a _second-tier_ cooperative, or a
_multistakeholder (MSC)_ cooperative.], while remaining open to
structures and relationships that may arise through its operations, to
the extent that they do not diminish worker primacy.footnote:[Rather
than prescribing specific complementary organizations, educational
initiatives, and mutual aid funds, the cooperative could create
conditions for such elements to grow organically with members'
interests.] This approach, although inspired by Mondragón's
evolutionfootnote:[Ramon Flecha & Ignacio Santa Cruz, Cooperation for
Economic Success: The Mondragón Case. Analyse & Kritik, pp 157–170. Jan
2011.]^,^footnote:[Imaz, Freundlich, and Kanpandegi; chapter 10 in S.
Novkovic et al. (eds.), Humanistic Governance in Democratic
Organizations, Humanism in Business Series, 2023.], recognizes that the
cooperative's true form and function will develop through complex
interactions among membersfootnote:[Ralph D. Stacey and Chris Mowles,
Strategic Management and Organisational Dynamics: The challenge of
complexity to ways of thinking about organisations, 7th ed. 2016. At
189.] and with a broader (and sometimes hostile) environment.

An example of the second-degree structure in Mondragón is Ikerlan, a
technology research and development cooperative founded in 1974.
Ikerlan's governing membership comprised both workers and
user-customers. Initially, the user-customer members were other
Mondragón cooperative firms, “though later, conventional firms were also
admitted into this stakeholder group.”footnote:[Ibid at 300.]

Adopting a second-degree cooperative structure similar to Ikerlan's
could allow the cooperative to establish formal relationships with other
organizations from the outset, potentially including other tech
cooperatives, ethical tech companies, or non-profit organizations that
could benefit from the cooperative's software. These organizations would
become members of the cooperative (alongside the electorally-prioritized
worker-members), providing, potentially, market access,
structurally-constrained financial support, and a built-in user base for
the software being developed.

The cooperative's financial structure should be designed from inception
to support both democratic principles and operational resilience through
multiple mechanisms: initial worker-owners would contribute capital
according to their means (subject to a ceiling), while ongoing capital
accumulation would be linked to hours worked rather than initial buy-in;
mandatory contributions to indivisible reserves would be built into
cost-plus pricing methods to provide buffers against market pressures;
and transparent systems would track both collective and individual
capital accounts, with workers accumulating withdrawable equity through
hours worked while a portion of surplus goes to collective reserves.

To incentivize user-member participation, the cooperative could offer
(necessarily constrained) voting rights, as well as patronage dividends
based on usage or a special class of membership shares.footnote:[One
idea for aligning individual member incentives with a cooperative
network's long-term success is implementing a single utility token
system. In this system, members would exchange (e.g.) dollars for tokens
at a centrally determined rate, using these tokens to purchase equity in
any affiliated cooperative. Dividends would be calculated based on
percent equity and paid out in dollars. The token could also be used to
purchase products or services from member cooperatives, at their
discretion. The idea here would be to create a semi-closed micro-economy
that reinforces cooperative principles while providing an attenuated
sort of internal liquidity. The token's price, being centrally managed,
would be insulated from external market volatility. Members could only
"cash out" by selling tokens back to a network-operated agent, and
subject to various constraints. While not offering direct price
discovery, this system could provide insights into cooperative health
through metrics like equity demand, dividend yields, and token
velocity.] This approach, after Arizmendiarrieta, seeks to align user
interests with the cooperative's long-term success while maintaining
worker control.footnote:[While transparency can help identify conflicts
of interest and external influences, complete transparency may not
always be desirable, as Buterin (2022 at 319) argues. Cooperatives could
implement sufficient transparency for accountability while protecting
individual privacy where needed. This might involve using cryptographic
techniques similar to those used in some blockchain systems, allowing
verification of important information without revealing all details.]
This structure could be fortified by embedding protections against
service degradationfootnote:[The technical term for this is
_enshittification_. It is vividly exemplified by the Muskification of
Twitter/X. See Cory Doctorow, Pluralistic: Leaving Twitter had no effect
on NPR's traffic, 14 Oct 2023.
<https://pluralistic.net/2023/10/14/freedom-of-reach/#ex>] and user
exploitation in the cooperative's founding documents. These would
establish legally binding user rights, including privacy, quality of
service, and fair treatment, making it constitutionally challenging for
the cooperative to engage in practices that undermine user interests or
platform quality.

Alongside this structure, the cooperative could develop educational
programs in their software niche. This reflects Mondragon's origins,
which began with Arizmendiarrieta's vocational training school in 1943.
The software cooperative could hold regular skill-sharing sessions or
develop online courses. The goal would be to foster a community of
skilled individuals and cultivate a shared vision and set of values.

Education is a key interface to democracy. And just as the User
Experience of software is enormously important for its adoption, the
Developer Experience is crucial to the adoption of a tech stack. A
software cooperative ought to be keenly attuned to the user/developer
experience of its members as they interact with the cooperative in all
senses. In software development, long cycle times (e.g. the time between
coding a feature and finishing the automated test suite, or
alternatively, the time between merging to main and being live in
production) are a red flag suggesting a subpar developer experience.
Maintaining a vibrant cooperativist spirit will probably involve an
analogous sensitivity to the developer-practitioner-user experience of
democracy. There are many different ways to have a meeting or
deliberative session (e.g. asynchronous vs. synchronous). *Finding the
right formats for the situation will probably be important. And the
situation will often be different from “last time”.*

The experiences of Mondragón — and recent events at OpenAI — highlight
the importance of informed and critical thinking in organizational
culture. In Mondragón, shifts in managerial ideology towards
'efficiency' (in parallel with the broader advent of neoliberalism)
created tensions with the cooperative's founding principles. In their
1996 book, Kasmirfootnote:[Sharryn Kasmir, The Myth of Mondragón:
Cooperatives, Politics, and Working-Class Life in a Basque Town. June C.
Nash, Editor. State University of New York Press, Albany, 1996.] notes
that "managers [had] shed their cooperativist ideology in favor of an
'efficiency' ideology," arguing for more "economistic or capitalistic
changes." This ideological shift undermined the cooperativist spirit,
and had it not been challenged, could have been devastating.

Complementarily, recent OpenAI leadership drama demonstrates the
potential pitfalls when workers lack the full context for major
decisions. When OpenAI's board of directors briefly removed Sam Altman
from his role as CEO in November of 2023, most employees reacted based
on immediate concerns and personal
loyaltiesfootnote:[https://web.archive.org/web/20241006075739/https://www.wired.com/story/openai-staff-walk-protest-sam-altman/],
potentially overlooking deeper
ethicalfootnote:[https://perma.cc/M8FZ-2BET]^,^footnote:[https://perma.cc/8BCR-6XKJ]
or strategic issues that might have motivated the board's actions.

The cooperative could establish or join a mutual aid fund among its
network of member organizations and independent developers. This fund,
inspired by Mondragón’s Lagun Aro social welfare systemfootnote:[Flecha
& Santa Cruz, 2011], could serve as a partial financial safety net. Each
member would contribute a small percentage of their monthly revenue or a
fixed amount, and the fund would be cooperatively managed. It could be
used for providing short-term loans or covering unexpected expenses.

In addition to these formal structures, the cooperative could develop
'unwritten rules' to guide decision-making processes, particularly when
dealing with complex multi-stakeholder issues. These informal practices
could help balance the interests of different stakeholder
groupsfootnote:[Imaz, Freundlich, and Kanpandegi, 2023]. For example,
when a decision primarily affects one group of members (such as workers
or users), other stakeholders could voluntarily step back from the
decision-making process, allowing those most impacted to have a stronger
voice. This flexible approach, as seen in Mondragón cooperatives like
Ederlan Tafalla, Eroski, and Caja Laboral (now Laboral Kutxa), can help
maintain democratic principles while addressing practical challenges
that arise in multi-stakeholder organizations. These unwritten rules
would not replace formal governance structures but would complement
them, providing a cultural framework for collaborative decision-making.

Financially, this structure could provide a foundation for the new
cooperative. Member organizations could contribute capital, either
through membership fees or by purchasing shares.

As these various components matured and proved their value, they could
become more comprehensive. The educational initiative could become a
recognized training program or even partner with existing institutions,
the mutual aid fund could develop into a chartered
bank[multiblock footnote omitted], and the second-degree cooperative
structure could expand to include a wider network of organizations.

[arabic, start=6]
. {blank}
+
____
The Case for Worker-First Software Cooperatives
____

To address concerns about technology concentration and the potential
misuse of advanced technologies like LLMs,
cooperativesfootnote:[Worker-owned cooperatives are not new. From the
early Christian communities described in the Book of Acts, through
medieval guilds and monasteries, to the Rochdale Pioneers of the 19th
century, cooperative models have a rich history of providing
alternatives to dominant economic structures (Schneider, 2018). The
International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) traces the modern cooperative
movement back to 1844 (ICA, 2015, <https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA>, p ix).
Software cooperatives can build upon this legacy.] could develop
open-source technological infrastructure, while understanding Frederic
S. Lee's concepts of market governancefootnote:[Frederic S. Lee, Ed.
Tae-Hee Jo, Microeconomic Theory: A Heterodox Approach. London and New
York: Routledge, 2017 at 66.]. As outlined above, a multi-stakeholder
approach provides a model — combining a second-degree cooperative
structure with educational initiatives and a mutual aid fund. However,
the complexity of balancing multiple stakeholder interests, maintaining
democratic processes at scale and longitude, and competing in a market
dominated by traditional corporate structures could present significant
hurdles. While cooperatives can offer promising alternatives, they are
not a panacea and will require ongoing adaptation and reflexive
operationfootnote:[Stacey & Mowles at 500].

The potential market for such cooperative ventures is significant;
platforms like GitHub boast over 100 million usersfootnote:[James
Governor, State of Open: 100m and counting. A UK conference that
matters. RedMonk, February 6, 2023.] as of 2023. We should also note
that enterprise adoption is often key to long-term success.footnote:[See
generally James Governor, Open Source Foundations Considered Helpful,
RedMonk, September 13, 2024. This article’s emphasis on enterprise trust
and adoption (via CNCF as described therein) implies that it is a key
factor in the long-term success and sustainability of open source
projects.] Alongside individuals and other worker-first cooperatives,
software cooperatives could market to larger enterprises with
sympathetic values, e.g., B Corporations.

For example, a federation of software cooperatives could collaboratively
create and maintain open-source platforms analogous to
GitHub.footnote:[Some GitHub alternatives, such as Codeberg, already
exist.] These platforms would be designed to better accommodate
collaborative ownership models. Or, cooperatives could unite to develop
artificial intelligence technologies that prioritize explainability,
dependability, and alignment with public interest over corporate profit
motives. By applying production analysis techniques, and
inter-cooperative governance structures, cooperatives can ensure these
technological projects are economically viable and competitive with
traditional alternatives.

This approach both addresses practical concerns and challenges
fundamental economic assumptions. By questioning assumptions such as
perfect information in markets and profit maximization as the path to
optimal social outcomes, cooperatives can articulate a vision of
economic value that includes social and environmental factors. This
critical perspective enables cooperatives to justify their alternative
approaches not just as ethical choices, but as economically sound
strategies for creating sustainable, democratic workplaces. In doing so,
they can advocate for federal and state policy changes that recognize
and support their structures.

Even within a cooperative organization, dynamics will remain complex,
and will require adaptability and responsiveness to the often unplanned
realities of day-to-day operations. This means setting the stage(s) for
ongoing reflection and adjustment, where members are attuned to the
evolving patterns of their interactions and ready to modify structures
and practices as needed.footnote:[Stacey and Mowles at 447] At the
ensemble/shop/small-team level, a post-session retrospective may be
useful.footnote:[In a retrospective, the ensemble asks itself questions
such as "’Should we do more of what went well? Should we change what
didn't go well?’" Zuill & Meadows, 2022 at 25.] At the same time
(particularly in a remote work context): “Prefer action over endless
debate. We try it as soon as we have an idea instead of continuing to
debate it.”footnote:[Zuill & Meadows, 2022 at 110.] This nuanced posture
toward deliberation could build resilience and avoid the pitfalls of
rigid thinking and fixed mindsets.

As software cooperatives develop alternative economic structures, they
should also recognize the current shift towards higher-level
abstractions, integrated developer experiences, and
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) in cloud offeringsfootnote:[Stephen
O'Grady, What AWS Tells Us About Heroku 2.0. RedMonk, June 23, 2021]. By
focusing on PaaS solutions, the cooperative could foreground user
experience while implementing a transparent, cost-plus pricing model.

[arabic, start=7]
. {blank}
+
____
Imagine ubiquitous self-awareness, attention to detail, curiosity, and
cognitive flexibility
____

The evolution of Mondragón's structure illustrates why education and
continuous learning and exploration must be core to a software
cooperative. As Kasmir details, Mondragón grew from individual
cooperatives into a complex network with a Cooperative Congress. This
centralization was driven by the need to respond to economic crises and
increased competition from Spain's entry into the European Economic
Community. However, some workers perceived this shift as a "dissolution
of democracy," feeling that decision-making power was moving further
away from the shop floor. This (arguably context-specific) tension
between organizational efficiency and grassroots democratic control
parallels challenges in modern tech companies. At OpenAI, for instance,
the rapid growth of the company and the high-stakes nature of AI
development led to a governance crisis that the majority of employees
were ill-equipped to critically evaluate.

Critical thinking is not just about developing individual skills, but
about creating organizational cultures and structures that encourage
healthy skepticism and thorough analysis. In Mondragón, workers
mobilized against attempts to widen salary disparities, demonstrating
the potential power of an engaged and thoughtful workforce. However, the
OpenAI situation reminds us that collective action, while powerful,
needs to be grounded in comprehensive understanding and careful
deliberation. In both cases, we see the need for organizational
structures that not only allow for democratic participation but also
ensure that participants have the knowledge and presence of mind to make
informed decisions about complex issues.

These examples underscore the need for transparency, continuous
learning, and robust mechanisms for debate and dissent. They challenge
us to think about how to balance expertise with broad participation, how
to cultivate leadership that facilitates rather than dominates, and how
to ensure that democracy and solidarity can withstand rapid changes in
technological and animal spirits.

Understanding how and why to build alternative economic structures
requires understanding the mutually reinforcing processes of capitalism
and racism - from the transatlantic slave trade to modern-day labor
market segmentation. Any attempt to create a more equitable economic
model must learn this history and its ongoing damages. For a software
cooperative, this could mean a journal or book club during work hours.
Such a forum could provide a space for members to engage with
contemporary scholarship that analyzes issues of racial justice through
a lens of racial capitalism. It might begin with Part One of
[.underline]#Resisting Borders and Technologies of
Violence#.footnote:[Mizue Aizeki, Matt Mahmoudi, and Coline Schupfer,
eds., Resisting Borders and Technologies of Violence, New York, NY:
Haymarket, 2024] Through readings and discussions, members could learn
how racism continues to shape the tech industry and the broader
political economy.

[arabic, start=8]
. {blank}
+
____
Economic Analysis of Cooperative Models
____

While working to actualize alternative economic models, cooperatives
navigate existing market realities. Lee's (2017) market analysis reveals
why enterprises cannot survive through price competition alone - they
must develop governance mechanisms to ensure stable sequential
production.footnote:[Lee at 142] In other words: to stay in business, an
enterprise must continuously advance funds to buy inputs and pay
workers, then recover these costs through sales, only to advance funds
again for the next production period. This cycle must generate enough
revenue to not only cover costs but also maintain necessary reserves and
fund growth. If prices fall too low, or if the cycle is interrupted, the
enterprise cannot continue operating. Traditional firms develop
governance mechanisms like trade associations to prevent destructive
price competition from breaking this cycle. The second-degree
cooperative structure proposed earlier could enable similar market
stabilization while democratizing its implementation. It could help
reveal the complex dynamicsfootnote:[An examination of market governance
could involve studying pricing mechanisms, entry barriers, and control
structures within the industry. It could analyze how changes in pricing
affect the quantity of products or services sold (studying market demand
curves). It could use tools like the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (Lee at
156) to assess the level of competition and identify potential
collaborators or competitors.] and structures shaped by established
players without replicating their monopolistic practices. In developing
such structures, cooperatives could find strategies to operate within
them and potentially reshape themfootnote:[Tankus, Nathan and Herrine,
Luke, Competition Law as Collective Bargaining Law (May 5, 2022).
Cambridge Handbook of Labour in Competition Law, Cambridge University
Press (2022), Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3847377.].

This perspective aligns with Zhang et al.'s (2024)
findingsfootnote:[Zhang, J., Zamani, E. D., Gerli, P., & Mora, L.
(2024). Co-constructing cooperative value ecosystems: A critical realist
perspective. Information Systems Journal, 1–41.
https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12549] on digital platform cooperatives
(DPCs). Their study identifies "co-constructing cooperative value
ecosystems" as a core category, emphasizing how DPCs are actively
creating new economic structures rather than simply operating within
existing ones.footnote:[Zhang et al.'s study identifies generative
mechanisms such as "collective identity and empowerment" and
"government-community symbiosis," illustrating how cooperatives can
foster change through both internal dynamics and external relationships.
Their focus on contextual conditions, including "grassroots mobilization
and advocacy" and "legislative frameworks for cooperative integration,"
underscores the role of human agency and institutional structures in
shaping economic change.]^,^footnote:[The cooperative model could
potentially offer slower and steadier growth by maintaining strong
open-source principles. This approach could be particularly attractive
in the "Post-Valkey World," (Stephen O'Grady,
<https://redmonk.com/sogrady/2024/07/16/post-valkey-world/>) where
there's increasing concern about the stability of open-source licenses.]
However, these structures must enable the cooperative to maintain
sequential production - generating sufficient revenue to cover costs and
fund continued operations while building necessary reserves.

Cooperatives are not immune to external pressures and influences. In the
late 1980s, the impact of neoliberal and technocratic impulses was
tangible on the Mondragón shop floor. As one worker in Clima recounted:
"They said they were coming to organize the factory. They said Clima
would get seventy-five million pesetas more [a year] just by
reorganizing. They said that, on average, people had to increase
productivity by 18 percent. Some people had to increase 30 percent. They
said they were not going to make us work faster, just cut out dead
times." The pursuit of efficiency could lead to increased work
intensity, potentially undermining the cooperative's original goals of
worker empowerment and wellbeing.

Kasmir (1996) describes how Arizmendiarrieta saw education as key to
"the emancipation of a class or of a people." However, in light of
recent experiences, we might expand this vision of education beyond
technical skills to include critical analysis of organizational
structures, ethical implications of technology, and the complexities of
governance.

While cooperatives aim to advance social democracy, complex economic
systems cannot be fully controlled or predicted. Cooperatives could
adopt flexible approaches like cost-plus pricingfootnote:[A cost-plus
pricing approach could use the formula: p = EATC~B~ × (1 + r), where p
is the price, EATC~B~ is the enterprise average total cost at budgeted
capacity utilization, and r is the markup rate collectively determined
by the cooperative (see Lee at 159). The markup r would be established
through democratic processes, considering factors such as desired
reinvestment, community contributions, and fair worker compensation.].
This approach aims to cover costs and generate profits for reinvestment,
worker benefits, and community initiatives.footnote:[The International
Cooperative Alliance (ICA) provides guidance on how cooperatives handle
financial matters, including raising capital, dealing with surpluses,
and managing reserves (ICA,
<https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA[[.underline]#https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA#]>,
p 29, 2015). Software cooperatives could adapt these principles; they
might establish indivisible reserves to ensure long-term stability, or
develop innovative ways to raise capital, such as member investment
accounts or community shares. While engaging with larger tech ecosystems
and seeking funding, software cooperatives must vigilantly maintain
their autonomy (ICA, p 46, 2015). This might mean carefully structuring
partnerships with tech giants, ensuring that any external investments
come without voting rights, and maintaining majority member ownership
and control in all circumstances.]

Cooperatives could form (or join preexisting) inter-cooperative
associations or federations inspired by traditional trade associations.
These structures could facilitate knowledge sharing, enhance market
influence, and promote ethical practices[multiblock footnote omitted].
Unlike traditional trade associations that often prioritize profit
maximization, cooperative federations could balance economic viability
with societal goals.footnote:[This vision for inter-cooperative networks
builds upon a long tradition of cooperative federations. From medieval
guilds that set standards across towns to the International Cooperative
Alliance (ICA) formed in 1895, cooperatives have long recognized the
power of collaboration (Schneider, 2018). The ICA provides examples of
how cooperatives work together through federations and apex
organizations (ICA, 2015, <https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA>, p 25).
Inter-cooperative governance structures could help address challenges of
coordination and competition. In the tech industry, this could manifest
as collaborative software development platforms.]

While cooperatives offer promising alternatives to traditional business
structures, they operate within a broader economic and environmental
context that presents challenges. Since combustion engines became
widespread ~ 265 years ago, humans have sunk ~ 145 ppm-worth of CO~2~
into the Earth’s atmosphere. Beneath these dry numbers is breathtaking
damage. Taking stock of the damage reveals that our individual
arrangements — e.g., our 401(k) accounts — intertwine with the global
infrastructure of fossil fuel extraction and combustion.

The venture capitalist — anyone with a 401(k) — is perpetually in search
of their exit. There is no exit, and there is no outside. We are always
already part of an interconnected web of social, economic, and power
relationships.footnote:[Michel Foucault, _The History of Sexuality,
Volume 1_. See also Ballerinas on the Dole with Colleen Hooper, Money on
the Left.
https://moneyontheleft.org/2022/02/08/ballerinas-on-the-dole-with-colleen-hooper/]^,^footnote:[Worker-owners
should have a mechanism to “cash out” their equity, albeit through much
more constrained transaction volumes than the NYSE. In other words there
could be limits on transaction volume, size, timing, counterparty,
counterparty reserve level, and so on. Counterparties could be
restricted to affiliated cooperatives, or a single agent representing
the full cooperative membership.] Thinking that we can opt out of the
consequences of our choices — even the ones long ago made by “others” —
is delusional.

Worker-owned cooperatives could be part of a reinvigorated public sphere
and civil society. As macroeconomists have pointed out,footnote:[William
Mitchell, “There is no need to issue public debt”, Blog post, 3 Sept
2015.
<https://billmitchell.org/blog/?p=31715[[.underline]#https://billmitchell.org/blog/?p=31715#]>.
See also William Mitchell, L. Randall Wray, and Martin Watts,
Macroeconomics. Red Globe Press, 2019 at 499. See also ibid. at 533.]
monetary sovereigns can fund public programs like Social Security
without relying on debt issuance or the whims of financial markets.
Social Security (or an analogous public mechanism) could, therefore,
provide for retirees everything that the 401(k) does — even if every
publicly-traded company decided to go private and IPOs stopped
happening. Relying on speculative investments for retirement security is
both precarious and unnecessary when public solutions are
available.footnote:[To illustrate how this scenario is more plausible
than you might think, consider TreasuryDirect. This national institution
serves retail customers on a daily basis. TreasuryDirect could
automatically set up an account for every US person who does not already
have one. Similar to how it did for the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, Congress could authorize sufficient dollar transfers from the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in perpetuity for
TreasuryDirect to match savings deposits at 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, or any
multiple necessary for that saver to have a dignified retirement. (This
would involve amending Title 31 [Treasury], Title 26 [IRS data sharing],
and the Federal Reserve Act.)]

Cooperatives present an alternative to traditional business structures
by distributing ownership among those who contribute their labor (and
there are far more types of labor than are typically acknowledged). This
distribution could influence, but would hardly control, complex
macroeconomic outcomes! Cooperatives should aim to equitably distribute
wealth in a constitutively high-demand, tight-full-employment,
guaranteed-jobs economy,footnote:[Pavlina R. Tcherneva, The Case for a
Job Guarantee. Polity, 2020.] and contribute to a green “just
transition”footnote:[Analogously during World War 2 in the US, labor
unions were important to keeping profit margins and executive
compensation in check; this is why the benefits of running the economy
hot did not all accrue to the already-wealthy.]. However, the actual
results cannot be precisely engineered; they will emerge from countless
local interactions, against a Federal Government fiscal policy backdrop
of formidable influence.

Reimagining economic structures through cooperatives and other forms of
public power challenges the idea that current configurations are
inevitable or optimal.footnote:[Following is another example of a
suboptimal status quo. Given all that needs repair, the idea that
_involuntary_ unemployment is sometimes _necessary_ for the greater good
of inflation control seems more than a little preposterous. In other
words, people eager to work are being turned away because, supposedly
and incomprehensibly, nobody in their community can find anything for
them to do (or they could, but if they did, it would blow up the price
of gasoline and eggs).] The historical approach of critical
realist-grounded theory supports this challenge; the approach recognizes
that economic structures are historically contingent and shaped by human
decisions and actions. As Lee argues, historical change is not
predetermined or cyclical, nor does it follow any grand narrative or
inevitable path. Instead, it is open-ended and can take various forms;
it “can just only be change.”footnote:[Lee, 2017, p 30.]

[arabic, start=9]
. {blank}
+
____
Maintaining Solidarity and Labor Connections
____

Mondragón's history underscores the importance of maintaining
connections with broader labor movements and fostering internal
solidarity, even as organizations grow and evolve. As Kasmir notes,
"After the Ulgor strike [leaders were fired via a majority vote],
cooperators had the reputation of not expressing solidarity with the
rest of Mondragón's working class, and they were seen as increasingly
isolated in their own privileged work world."

The 2013 collapse of Fagor Electrodomésticos provides crucial lessons
about how solidarity can become dysfunctional when separated from
integrated decision-making processes. As Ortega and
Uriartefootnote:[Ortega Sunsundegi, I., & Uriarte Zabala, L. (2015).
Reios y dilemas del cooperativismo de Mondragón tras la crisis de Fagor
Electrodomésticos. LANKI, Instituto de Estudios Cooperativos, Mondragon
Unibertsitatea. Retrieved from http://www.lanki.coop] (2015) explain:

"Se puso excesivo énfasis "Excessive emphasis was placed

en el aspecto jurídico de on the legal aspect of

la participación en disputas participation in assembly

de asamblea y muy poco en disputes and too little on

la fertilidad creativa de the creative fertility of

la participación del worker participation in the

trabajador en el propio workplace itself."

puesto de trabajo."

This separation between formal participation and workplace integration
became particularly problematic during the 2007-8 financial crisis, when

"la caída del 65% del mercado "The 65% collapse of the Spanish

español provoca una reducción market caused a reduction in

en la facturación de FED de Fagor Electrodomésticos' revenue

800 millones de euros (de los of 800 million euros (from

1.800 millones de euros en 1.8 billion euros in sales

ventas alcanzados en el 2006 achieved in 2006 to 1 billion

a los 1.000 millones de euros in 2008)"

euros en 2008)"

The crisis exposed how managerial structures had gradually separated
from democratic governance, creating conditions where worker solidarity
became defensive rather than constructive. This organizational
separation reflected deeper ideological transformations. As Ortega and
Uriarte explain, the cooperative experienced a fundamental shift in how
workers conceived their relationship to the enterprise:

"En estas nuevas condiciones "Under these new conditions

se afirma que el pensamiento it is affirmed that cooperative

cooperativista entra en thinking enters into decline

declive y las influencias de and the influences of what

lo que algunos han llamado some have called 'fordist

'la izquierda fordista' son left' are palpable in this

palpables en este sentido. sense. This is a culture of

Es esta una cultura de la the left that expands in the

izquierda que se expande en phase of welfare capitalism,

la fase del capitalismo del for whom the factors of

bienestar, para quien los economic development are a

factores del desarrollo given fact that doesn't merit

económico son un hecho dado too much attention, and that

al que no merece la pena centers its action on a

prestar demasiada atención, demanding dynamic in pursuit

y que centra su acción en of greater conquests and

una dinámica reivindicativa rights for the working class

en pos de mayores conquistas in the struggle for the

y derechos para la clase distribution of generated

trabajadora en la lucha por economic wealth."

el reparto de la riqueza

económica generada."

This shift toward what the authors call "fordist left" thinking is
particularly significant - workers began to see themselves as labor in
opposition to management rather than as integrated worker-owners
collectively responsible for the enterprise's sustainability. Rather
than engaging with the complex dynamics of maintaining a cooperative
business, worker consciousness shifted toward a more traditional model
of claiming rights and benefits from an apparently separate management
structure. This ideological separation reinforced and was reinforced by
the growing operational divide between technical and social governance.

The global financial crisis not only devastated sales but exposed deeper
cultural transformations within the cooperative. As Ortega and Uriarte
explain:

"Este proceso coincide, a su "This process coincides with

vez, con el relevo de la the replacement of the first

primera generación de generation of directors by a

directores por una nueva new generation with a 'more

generación de perfil 'más technocratic' profile, where

tecnócrata' y en el que el the charisma and leadership

carisma y la capacidad de capacity attributed to

liderazgo que se atribuyen previous generations were

a las generaciones becoming diluted."

anteriores se van diluyendo."

This transition led to what some veteran members characterized as
"cooperativismo neoliberal":

"el pensamiento cooperativista "cooperative thinking enters

entra en declive y se abre into decline and gives way

paso a 'un sistema to 'a neoliberal cooperative

cooperativista neoliberal' system' in which people

en el que la gente empieza begin to think more about

a pensar más 'en la cartilla, 'the bankbook, about money,

en los dineros, en los about interest rates and

intereses y no en la not about the cooperative.'"

cooperativa.'"

The solidarity mechanisms of the broader Mondragón network, while
well-intentioned, may have inadvertently enabled this dysfunction.
According to one cooperative manager:

"todas estas ayudas no han "all this aid may have had

tenido un efecto anestésico, an anesthetic effect, in

en el sentido de que han the sense that they have

evitado una reacción más prevented a more forceful

contundente por parte de reaction from the cooperative,

la cooperativa, y el and the thought that if

pensamiento de que si there had been somewhat less

hubiera habido hace años solidarity years ago, they

algo menos de solidaridad might have acted, perhaps,

se hubiera actuado, quizá, in a more responsible way

de una manera más pushing Fagor Electrodomésticos

responsable empujando a 'to do their homework.'"

Fagor Electrodomésticos

'a hacer sus deberes.'"

These challenges culminated in a profound disconnect between workers and
what was nominally their own enterprise. The authors note:

"Uno de los hechos que "One of the facts that

especialmente llamaba la especially drew attention

atención en el contexto de in the context of the

las manifestaciones...era demonstrations...was the

la gran distancia que great distance that members

reflejaban los socios showed toward what, at

respecto a lo que, en cuanto least in terms of ownership,

a la propiedad por lo menos, was their own business

era su propio proyecto de project."

empresa."

This pattern, where workers react to decisions rather than participating
in their formation, continues to manifest in contemporary tech
organizations. Like Fagor's workers, OpenAI employees lacked the
integrated context needed for genuine strategic participation when
OpenAI's board briefly removed Sam Altman as CEO in 2023. As suggested
above in section 5, workers' immediate solidarity with the Altman seems
to have prevented deeper consideration of governance issues. Both cases
demonstrate how formal deliberative structures, when separated from
day-to-day operational integration, can lead to strategic blunders.

Our proposed ensemble programming and rotation practices aim to address
these failure modes directly by preventing the separation of technical
and social governance, and maintaining radically-integrated
decision-making to prevent class formation. However, these practices
would probably need be complemented by robust mechanisms for solidarity
during crisis. The Fagor experience shows that formal democratic
structures alone are insufficient.

The goal is not just to prevent class formation but to create conditions
where genuine strategic thinking emerges from collective practice rather
than being imposed from above. As Stacey and Mowles remind us,
organizational patterns emerge from countless local interactions. The
Fagor case shows how these patterns can gradually shift toward
separation and hierarchy even within formally democratic structures. Our
challenge is to create patterns that consistently regenerate integration
and collective capability instead.

[arabic, start=10]
. {blank}
+
____
Problematizing the Lone Genius Myth
____

Software development demands collaborative effort, yet the tech industry
clings to organizational structures that privilege individual authority
over collective wisdom. In 2024, the U.S. tech sector remains enthralled
by the "genius founder in a garage" narrative, despite evidence that
this mythology undermines both innovation and productivity.

Consider a software development team: Their work is not just coding.
Instead, they engage in what Lee identifies as an integrated production
process characterized by:

* {blank}
+
____
Real-time synthesis of diverse knowledge domains (technical, financial,
user experience, business logic)
____
* {blank}
+
____
Inseparability of individual contributions from the collective output
____
* {blank}
+
____
Self-reinforcing generation of social relationships and knowledge
capital
____

Lee's analysis of production's social dimension challenges both the myth
of the solitary programmer and the false technical/non-technical
dichotomy. Even a seemingly straightforward feature implementation
requires simultaneous consideration of business requirements,
infrastructure constraints, security architecture, user experience
design, and financial parameters. Each decision point involves multiple
domains of expertise working in concert, making artificial
organizational divisions particularly destructive in software
development.

Leslie et al. show how fields that prize “innate” talent systematically
exclude women and minorities.footnote:[Leslie et al., "Expectations of
brilliance underlie gender distributions across academic disciplines,"
Science, 2015] Gould demonstrates that such beliefs about natural
ability serve to disguise and reinforce existing social
hierarchies.footnote:[Gould, The Mismeasure of Man, 1996] When the
software industry worships individual genius, it therefore does more
than perpetuate a false narrative — it actively undermines innovation,
inclusion, and democratic values.

[arabic, start=11]
. {blank}
+
____
The Two-Track Trap
____

The persistent separation between "specialist" and "traditional
consulting" tracks at major firms (as of 2023) exposes a fundamentally
Taylorist view of technical work - treating it as labor to be exploited
rather than a core capability to be cultivated. This mindset is evident
at "Big Four" consulting firms, where "specialists" face higher billable
hours yet lower compensation than their "traditional" colleagues. Until
COVID-19, population-scale changes in consumption, and unprecedented
federal macroeconomic intervention disrupted this pattern, the message
was clear: technical expertise was a resource to extract, not develop.

Combined with "up or out" advancement policies, this two-track model
produces a toxic dynamic: technical staff face overwork without paths to
influence, while managers lose technical competence. This squanders
human potential and undermines organizational performance.

Today's U.S. political economy fundamentally weakens democratic
participation by elevating individual tech oligarchs and venture
capitalists above collaborative decision-making processes. The
Jobs-Wozniak garage origin story has transcended myth to become a
destructive organizational template that distorts power relationships
throughout the industry. While individual contributions matter, our
current legal frameworks and institutional norms uncritically prioritize
them, creating a systematic bias against the collective nature of
technological innovation and production. We should think of
__all__footnote:[There is a small percentage of individuals, less than
2% I would hazard, who are straight-up assholes (see generally Robert I.
Sutton, The No Asshole Rule, Balance, 2010). More formally, we might say
that some people score highly on all three of the “socially aversive”
personality traits - psychopathy, Machiavellianism, and narcissism (see
e.g. Daniel N. Jones and Delroy L. Paulhus, Introducing the Short Dark
Triad (SD3): A Brief Measure of Dark Personality Traits, 2014). Spotting
someone like this can be tricky, and misidentifying them (false positive
or false negative) is unfair and costly. My point, without going too far
down this rabbit hole, is that although we should always work to bring
out the best in others, it would be naive to fight every single battle.
I think that people with a pattern of toxic behavior are an important
reason why new businesses fail. The best approach that I know of is to
build a robust culture of skillful communication, and practice
thoughtful, interdisciplinary research and development.] working people
— _not_ just the founders — as rockstars. Not everyone has fully
articulated their rock-stardom, but everyone has it in them (caveated by
footnote 62). Leadership co-creates the stage.footnote:[One way to
counteract structural biases towards commons enclosure by capital would
be to prevent potential 'rug pulls' in open-source projects. A software
cooperative could (a) adopt the Mozilla Public License (MPL) or Affero
General Public License (AGPL) for its open-source software; and (b)
assign the copyright to an outside open-source advocacy organization.
This approach could provide legal protection for the cooperative's
open-source commitments. This is not to suggest that all software should
be open-source all of the time. The point is that if you are going to
build a healthy community, then you should be intentional, deliberate,
and clear about what you truly value.]

[arabic, start=12]
. {blank}
+
____
Important Side Note on Professionalism, Propriety, and Profanity
____

If you read footnote 62, you encountered the word _asshole_. We used
this word because we believe it is the best tool for the job. Later, in
section 16, we use the word _bullshit_, referencing David Graeber’s
brilliant formulation “bullshit jobs.” Our philosophy on profane words
in the workplace is that (1) a little goes a long way; and (2) when used
carefully, they can prevent or curtail profane *deeds*. Moreover, there
is a *big* difference between discussing _assholery_ as a personality
trait we observe in a subset of people generally, on the one hand, and
on the other, associating this word even indirectly with *particular*
people with whom *we personally* have some form of relationship. We make
the same caution for _bullshit_; it is one thing to talk about the
sociological phenomenon of _bullshit jobs_; it is quite another to
associate aloud this word with particular positions or roles already
existing in our workplace!

[arabic, start=13]
. {blank}
+
____
Learning from the Great Engines
____

The Great Engine companies, before falling prey to what Hopper & Hopper
call "the Cult of the (so-called) Expert",footnote:[Hopper & Hopper, The
Puritan Gift, 2007] demonstrated how organizations can balance clear
authority with broad participation and initiative. Our rotation system
aims to recreate this balance in an explicitly democratic framework.

Current organizational divisions create harmful silos that prevent
natural integration across functions: technical insights don't shape
strategy, client needs fail to guide technical direction, operations
remain disconnected from architecture, and financial considerations
poorly inform development. This fragmentation contradicts the Great
Engine companies' successful model of organically interconnected
work.footnote:[Hopper & Hopper, The Puritan Gift, 2007]

Organizations artificially separate capabilities that naturally
reinforce each other: technical mastery from coordination skills, client
engagement from systems expertise, and operational knowledge from
strategic planning. This fragmentation produces what Gregor Hohpe calls
an "hourglass shape" of organizational understanding.footnote:[Gregor
Hohpe, The Software Architect Elevator, 2020] Yet his suggestion to add
an "architect" role would at worst be another artificial silo, and at
best be a restoration of the middle manager to their former glory - that
is, the glory at the pre-1970 “Great Engine” companies documented by
Hopper & Hopper, before MBA programs ruined what it means to be a middle
manager. Either way, a class hierarchy is left intact.

[arabic, start=14]
. {blank}
+
____
The Rhythm of Work
____

Treating technical work as an isolated specialty separate from core
business functions creates artificial barriers that undermine both
technical and organizational excellence. However, not all functions
benefit equally from rotation. While ensemble programming may thrive on
frequent rotation, client-facing roles demand stability. Client
relationships depend on trust, shared context, and dependability - areas
where rotation would be more limited.

Recognizing that distinct types of work have distinct natural
requirements differs fundamentally from imposing artificial divisions.
While some work thrives on frequent rotation and fresh perspectives,
other work needs deep relationship continuity. The challenge lies in
understanding these natural shapes while preventing them from enabling
class stratification. For example, the next section explains why the
rhythm of client relationship management is fundamentally different from
the rhythm of a mob programming session. And below, in section 16, we
categorize various functions into “suitable for rotation” versus
“suitable for voting” - however, this exercise is firstly meant as a
demonstration; different practitioners would probably arrive at slightly
different breakdowns (perhaps an opportunity to employ an aggregative
mechanism).

[arabic, start=15]
. {blank}
+
____
Crafting Client Connections
____

While many technical functions would benefit from rotation, client
relationships need continuity. Trust and shared understanding develop
over time, making frequent transitions counterproductive. Yet this
necessary stability creates risks: in traditional organizations, client
relationships often become exclusive channels where key contacts
accumulate concentrations of knowledge and power. When these individuals
depart or change roles, valuable institutional memory vanishes, harming
both client service and organizational effectiveness.

The "Single External Contact Approach" would organize client
relationships such that:

* {blank}
+
____
One member-worker serves as “single contact” for at most one client
contact
____
* {blank}
+
____
A dedicated-yet-rotating support team of worker-members backs each
single contact-external counterpart pair
____
* {blank}
+
____
Team members rotate secondary roles to share knowledge
____

In addition to decentralization, the purpose of this system is not to
enforce mathematically precise one-to-one relationships - which would be
neither practical nor desirable - but rather to protect worker wellbeing
by preventing client communications from becoming overwhelming. The
'single contact' designation is primarily about establishing clear
channels and boundaries. Technical tools like email filtering would
support this - for example, routing emails from non-designated client
contacts to separate queues rather than directly to a member's inbox.
While members may naturally interact with multiple external contacts in
various ways, having designated primary relationships may help maintain
sustainable patterns of client engagement while preventing it from
becoming all-consuming.

This system could afford both stability and adaptability in client
relationships. Small, consistent teams would support each client while
role rotation enabled knowledge transfer. For example: Alice serves as
single contact for Contact Y at Client X, supported by Bob and Charlie.
The team maintains relationship continuity through:

* {blank}
+
____
Rotating support roles
____
* {blank}
+
____
Documented client information and meeting minutes
____
* {blank}
+
____
Skill transfer (e.g., Alex shadowing Bob before transition)
____

With Alice as single contact for Contact Y at Client X, she builds
consistent trust while Bob and Charlie provide active support. The
support team structure enables smooth transitions - for instance, Bob
may shift to single contact for Contact W at New Client Q, with new
worker-member Alex taking his previous role. Clear, simple protocols
guide all transitions, whether planned or circumstantial.

Documentation, knowledge-sharing sessions, collaborative support work
(pairing and mobbing), and informal networks would hopefully ensure
information flows through the organization such that everyone feels like
they know what they need to know (and that those feelings are not
misleading). This organizational structure could balance relationship
stability with distributed knowledge and power. The idea is that
everyone is connected to the clients, but because the connection is
constrained to a single contact per person, everyone also has plenty of
bandwidth for other types of work. Democratic principles would guide
operations while celebrating normal human connections.

[arabic, start=16]
. {blank}
+
____
Democracy in Action
____

The cooperative could manage its diverse work patterns through several
mechanisms, which might include:

* {blank}
+
____
Every member does ensemble programming
____
* {blank}
+
____
All contribute to strategic discussions
____
* {blank}
+
____
Each maintains _just one_ relationship with an external contact who is a
single natural person (if there are not enough client contacts, then a
perhaps a prospect, or perhaps a colleague at another firm)
____

* {blank}
+
____
Collective decisions on major changes
____

The cooperative should distinguish between two aspects of democracy:
decision-making and reality-testing. Democratic decision-making involves
collectively choosing courses of action - for instance, voting to
allocate hours for developing a new documentation system. But democratic
reality-testing is about maintaining the collective ability to honestly
evaluate whether that system is serving any real purpose or has become
mere ritual. Concretely, democratic decision-making could look like:

* {blank}
+
____
Voting on resource allocation for new initiatives
____
* {blank}
+
____
Setting parameters for rotation schedules
____
* {blank}
+
____
Establishing or updating the compensation structure
____

Democratic reality-testing could look like:

* {blank}
+
____
Mob programming sessions where impractical processes are immediately
exposed
____
* {blank}
+
____
Regular opportunities for members to question whether established
systems still serve their purpose
____
* {blank}
+
____
MVP demonstrations where proposed solutions must prove their value
through working implementations
____
* {blank}
+
____
Protected spaces for discussing gaps between stated and actual value of
work - while mindful of human cognitive bias to presume criticism and
skepticism is more authoritative than constructive and positive
proposals — and the underappreciated value of negative results
____

The mob programming pattern may be powerful for reality-testing because
it is harder to maintain self-deception when working together in
real-time. When six people are implementing a process at the same
keyboard at the same time, its actual value (or lack thereof) would
become quickly apparent.

The two-track trap introduced earlier, in section 11, tends to generate
what Graeber calls "bullshit jobs" - roles that exist primarily to
manage other managers.footnote:[Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: A Theory, 2018]
This happens through a predictable pattern:

[arabic]
. {blank}
+
____
Management becomes separated from technical work
____
. {blank}
+
____
This separation creates communication problems
____
. {blank}
+
____
New roles are created to address these problems
____
. {blank}
+
____
These new roles create further separation and communication issues
____
. {blank}
+
____
The cycle continues, creating layers of bureaucracy
____

As Graeber notes, many people in such roles privately question whether
their jobs need to exist at all.footnote:[Graeber, 2018] This isn't
because coordination itself is unnecessary, but because the separation
of coordination from work creates the need for additional coordination
of coordination.

The Springfield Armory demonstrates that organizational effectiveness
requires balancing structured coordination with inclusive
participation.footnote:[HH at 50] While strategic decisions warrant
democratic processes, routine operations often function better through
streamlined methods like rotation. Success depends on aligning decision
mechanisms with decision types. In other words, rather than
micromanaging daily operations, democratic oversight would focus on
establishing and updating protocols. This approach mirrors both
Springfield's operational efficiency and the emergent leadership model
seen in ensemble programming, where authority flows from active
participation rather than formal appointment.

Rotation challenges the false dichotomy between technical and managerial
work. Instead of isolating technical expertise as a resource to exploit,
rotation develops both technical and leadership capabilities across the
organization, creating more effective operations by recognizing these
skills as complementary rather than separate domains.

*Rotation examples (short-term decisions):* on-call duties,
documentation curation tasks, regular maintenance work, coordinating
Single External Contact Approach

Rotating as a way of preventing bureaucratic accumulation:

* {blank}
+
____
No permanent coordination roles to defend
____
* {blank}
+
____
Direct experience prevents unnecessary processes
____
* {blank}
+
____
Fresh perspectives through regular changes
____
* {blank}
+
____
Natural simplification of procedures
____
* {blank}
+
____
Immediate feedback on process effectiveness
____
* {blank}
+
____
Integration of technical and managerial capabilities
____

*Voting examples (long-term decisions):* significant process changes,
resource allocation principles, long-term strategic plans

Voting as a way of preventing bureaucratic accumulation:

* {blank}
+
____
Deeply and broadly understood legislative process
____
* {blank}
+
____
Auditable (within reason) decision-making processes
____
* {blank}
+
____
Tunable rotation patterns
____
* {blank}
+
____
Power to modify coordination protocols
____

The two-track antipattern is not new. Taylor's attempt to separate
planning from execution led to similar proliferation of coordinators
coordinating coordinators. As we saw in the Great Engine companies, the
solution is not to eliminate coordination but to integrate it with the
work being coordinated.footnote:[Hopper & Hopper, The Puritan Gift,
2007]

The Japanese _kacho_ system offered one approach to this integration,
creating section heads who maintained both technical competence and
coordination responsibilities.footnote:[Ibid., discussion of Japanese
management practices at 115] However, the cooperative rotation system
democratizes this integration across overlapping sets of members,
encouraging leadership capabilities to develop naturally alongside
technical skills throughout the organization. This management philosophy
strengthens both personal and organizational capabilities. Individual
workers develop hands-on expertise alongside strategic thinking skills.
While maintaining their technical proficiency, they contribute to
operational and strategic decisions.

Flattened hierarchies and dispersed expertise could yield agile
responses to market changes while reducing administrative overhead. This
approach aims to preserve technical excellence by harmonizing individual
contributions with collective judgment. The outcome could be an
efficient organization that maintains essential coordination without
succumbing to bureaucratic excess. Beyond its democratic merit, this
model might deliver superior results.

[arabic, start=17]
. {blank}
+
____
Expertise Without Empire
____

Developing deep expertise is crucial for any organization. However,
certain types of expertise, finance and auditing among them, can become
chokepoints for democratic control.footnote:[Michael Power, The Audit
Society; Townley, Reframing Human Resource Management; Jackall, Moral
Mazes: The World of Corporate Managers; Rose & Miller, Governing the
Present: Administering Economic, Social and Personal Life] The challenge
is to develop expertise while preventing it from becoming a basis for
class-like divisions or inappropriate authority.

Financial expertise can become a power base through several mechanisms:
control over resource allocation, monopolistic interpretation of
financial metrics, and the mystification of operations behind
mathematical complexity. A cooperative might addresses these risks by
pioneering "finance mobs," where non-financial workers participate
directly in financial operations. However, some finance operations lack
collaborative tools that would be needed for regulatory compliance (the
need for a designated accountable person). The cooperative could begin
experimenting with collaborative financial work in limited, low-risk
contexts. Like the early mob programming experiments at Hunter
Industries, it would start small.

As we discussed above in section 15, client relationship management
requires special consideration. Unlike purely technical functions,
client relationships involve deep trust, shared context, and emotional
investment that make frequent rotation counterproductive. As we
understand from clinicians in the field of healthcare, particularly
mental healthcare, having to repeatedly rebuild trust relationships
creates unnecessary strain for both parties.

A cooperative could address these challenges through a system of
dispersed responsibility. At its core is the Single External Contact
Approach, where each member serves as the single contact for at most one
contact at _at most_ one client. This arrangement maintains relationship
continuity as the default.

Worker-members could request relationship reassignments, subject to some
review mechanism. Support roles would enable new members to gain client
relationship experience before taking on single contact
responsibilities.

Financial operations have regulatory requirements for clear
accountabilityfootnote:[Allen Holub has a thought-provoking blog post
that problematizes the emphasis placed on accountability in workplace
and corporate culture (#NoAccountability, 11 July 2022,
<https://holub.com/noaccountability/[[.underline]#https://holub.com/noaccountability/#]>).
It stands in some tension with Hopper & Hopper’s approving quotation of
Florence Nightingale: “someone has to be in charge”. What they and she
mean are that someone needs to be dependable and able to explain the
situation. What they perhaps underappreciate are the power dynamics that
Holub criticizes.]; effective collaboration would require supporting
tools that don't yet exist. Rather than trying to specify these tools up
front, a cooperative could follow the pattern that worked for mob
programming: let practitioners experiment with existing tools, observe
what works, and gradually develop purpose-built tools that support
emerging good practices. Perhaps look to models like surgical teams and
aircraft cockpit crews, which successfully combine clear individual
accountability with intensive real-time collaboration. Instead of trying
to mob everything immediately, the cooperative could identify specific
financial activities that could benefit most from real-time
collaboration, such as:

* {blank}
+
____
Complex financial modeling where multiple perspectives could catch
errors
____
* {blank}
+
____
Budget planning sessions where diverse input is valuable
____
* {blank}
+
____
Risk assessment activities where different viewpoints are crucial
____

Successful financial collaboration requires more than just structural
changes. The cooperative could develop a culture where questions are
welcomed, mistakes are treated as learning opportunities, knowledge
sharing is appreciated, and clear accountability coexists with
collective responsibility.

Progress toward more collaborative financial practices could be
evaluated based on outcomes such as error reduction, regulatory
compliance, and audit performance. This approach is intended to account
for the evolutionary nature of successful organizational innovations,
the need for tools and practices to co-evolve, the reality of regulatory
requirements, the importance of starting small and learning from
experience, and the critical role of cultural development.

Following Lee's analysis of production as inherently
interconnected,footnote:[Lee., p. 41] rotation could develop expertise
throughout the organization while democratic processes could ensure it
serves collective needs. This could create "distributed expertise" -
where deep knowledge enriches the collective without creating
overpowering chokepoints.

This integrated understanding might manifest as:

* {blank}
+
____
Financial workers rotating through software development
____
* {blank}
+
____
Developers participating in financial operations as tooling capabilities
mature
____
* {blank}
+
____
Everyone communicating with a client sooner or later
____
* {blank}
+
____
Deep knowledge sharing
____
* {blank}
+
____
Major decisions combining expertise with democratic process
____
* {blank}
+
____
Democratic oversight ensuring expertise serves collective needs
____

The mechanics of rotation should be structured to prevent both
bureaucratic accumulation and institutional amnesia. When individuals
monopolize technical direction or weaponize code standards as barriers
to entry, they create de facto authority. This problem compounds when
system complexity or historical codebase knowledge becomes a source of
unchecked influence.

Once a system or process has been approved for scaling beyond its MVP,
rotation could become mandatory but gradual (e.g. “no less than 10% and
no more than 40% of the team may rotate out in any given quarter”),
ensuring continuity of knowledge while preventing entrenchment. Original
creators would all eventually rotate to other work, but not
simultaneously - and they could still come back later. New members must
overlap with existing team members for effective knowledge transfer.

This pattern may help ensure that:

* {blank}
+
____
No one builds permanent fiefdoms or power trips around particular
systems
____
* {blank}
+
____
Knowledge is constantly distributed throughout the cooperative
____
* {blank}
+
____
Fresh perspectives regularly question existing processes
____
* {blank}
+
____
Systems remain comprehensible to new people or risk elimination
____

In traditional organizations, Infrastructure & Operations expertise
often consolidates into informal power centers. This manifests through
privileged control of deployments, exclusive production access, and
crisis response authority. Most concerning is when feelings of
employment precarity motivate accumulating technical debt for added job
security—where critical systems are understood by only select
individuals. Cooperatives could prevent such power accumulation through
structured responsibility-sharing: rotating on-call duties and
infrastructure roles.

The prevention of power concentration may require multiple reinforcing
mechanisms. In addition to the cooperative deliberately maintaining zero
permanent roles, every worker-member could receive an equal budget for
research, development, learning, and teaching - preventing financial
resources from becoming a source of power imbalance.

[arabic, start=18]
. {blank}
+
____
Building the Collaborative Space
____

Drawing on Arendt's concept of "spaces of appearance" - where
individuals reveal themselves through speech and action - we seek to
enable self-expression while meeting operational needs, by recognizing
that different work modes benefit from different environments.

The cooperative could greatly benefit from a continuously refined
physical and digital workspace. The layout could integrate focused quiet
zones with collaborative open areas, supporting diverse work modes, from
real-time ensemble programming to independent research. Both physical
and virtual spaces could be configured to enable formal and informal
knowledge exchange. Digital systems could maintain clear, accessible
engineering documentation, complemented by scheduling tools for rotation
management.

Financial Collaboration Spaces. The cooperative's physical and digital
infrastructure could also support the gradual development of
collaborative financial practices. This means:

* {blank}
+
____
Dedicated areas equipped for financial ensemble work with appropriate
privacy and security
____
* {blank}
+
____
Digital tools that maintain clear audit trails while enabling real-time
collaboration
____
* {blank}
+
____
Infrastructure for maintaining parallel traditional and experimental
accounting processes during transition periods
____

Client relationship spaces could serve a different but equally vital
function. These areas would support the development of deep
understanding between each single contact and their external
counterpart, while providing opportunities for support team members to
contribute fresh perspectives without disrupting established
relationships.

Coordination spaces might connect these different work modes. Meeting
facilitation roles could rotate regularly, while the composition of
meeting attendees could evolve gradually to maintain both continuity and
fresh input.

We should note that perennial changes in team/committee/meeting
composition does not _have_ to mean a constant sense of instability
(although that does seem like a very important risk to beware of).
People could rotate amongst a limited pool of other people. Thus someone
rolling off a team would not be saying “Sayonara” but rather “See you
soon!”

Modulating these different patterns of work while maintaining a positive
culture implies several mechanisms. For example, if an ensemble isn't
working - maybe people are talking over each other, or someone's
consistently dominating discussion - the members involved could discuss
it in their end-of-day retrospective. These short sessions might focus
on what went well that day and how to “turn up the good” as Woody Zuill
says. Issues that affect multiple teams might need broader discussion,
perhaps via asynchronous chat.

A software cooperative faces exciting territory in expanding ensemble
practices beyond programming. Many tasks have never been attempted as
ensemble work. When encountering a new type of work, members could try
it first as an ensemble, document the experience, and then adjust based
on what was learned. It's perfectly sensible to use traditional methods
after genuine experimentation (try it the weird way first).

[arabic, start=19]
. {blank}
+
____
Beyond Our Walls
____

While the ensemble can embody democratic values in daily small-team
(shop-level) operations, these principles could also be reflected in the
cooperative's overall (enterprise-level) governance mechanisms. Firstly,
there are intriguing possibilities for quite large ensembles (e.g. 30+
persons). Secondly, in the less experimental realm, overall governance
mechanisms can draw from cooperative practices, such as electoral
committees to oversee free and fair elections, board skills audits to
ensure competent leadership, and governance codes. As the International
Cooperative Alliance emphasizesfootnote:[International Cooperative
Alliance, Guidance Notes to the Co-operative Principles, p 19. 2015.
https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA], “Democratic member control is protected and
enhanced by effective co-operative legislation.” Software cooperatives
should establish bylaws that detail voting procedures, term limits for
elected positions, and mechanisms for member proposals and
decision-making.

The cooperative's commitment to democratic values could extend beyond
its internal practices, shaping its interactions with the broader tech
ecosystem and informing its approach to competition and innovation.
While leveraging adversarial interoperability to compete in the tech
landscape, the cooperative should respect user privacy. It should
observe fair competition practices, advocacy for open standards, and a
commitment to transparency. The cooperative should ensure its
interoperability practices genuinely promote competition and user choice
rather than inadvertently consolidating power.footnote:[See Cory
Doctorow, The Internet Con: How to Seize the Means of Computation, 2023,
at 55.] By maintaining a long-term vision of a more open and fair tech
ecosystem, the cooperative could demonstrate that it is possible to
compete effectively without resorting to the monopolistic practices it
aims to challenge. This stance could differentiate the cooperative in
the long run.

[arabic, start=20]
. {blank}
+
____
Engaging with Policy and Financial Institutions
____

While cooperatives aim to create alternative economic structures, they
can also engage strategically with government policy. Cooperatives could
advocate for supportive policies, such as preferential tax treatment,
access to public contracts, or legal recognition of cooperative
governance structures. Cooperatives could push for antitrust policy that
recognizes the value of smaller, democratically-owned enterprises in
maintaining competitive markets.footnote:[Governments also sometimes
attempt to co-opt or control cooperative movements. For example, in the
United States during the McCarthy era, some rural electric cooperatives
were pressured to prove their 'American' credentials and distance
themselves from leftist ideologies (Schneider, 2018).]

Cooperatives navigate a financial landscape shaped by _as-is_ fiscal and
monetary policy. Some recently-unearthed history of the Federal
Reservefootnote:[Nathan Tankus, Revealed: The Federal Reserve's Secret
1973 Plan to Bailout the Saving & Loan Industry That Very Nearly
Happened. Notes on the Crises Blog, 24 Sept 2024.
<https://perma.cc/6YVY-4NDX[[.underline]#https://perma.cc/6YVY-4NDX#]>]
inspires us to suggest inclusive emergency lending. The Federal
Reserve's 1973 plan to provide emergency liquidity support to the entire
Savings & Loan industry via the Federal Home Loan Banks^78^ demonstrates
the potential for central banks to support specific economic sectors.
Cooperatives could advocate for the inclusion of worker-owned
enterprises in such emergency lending programs, ensuring they have
access to crucial liquidity during economic crises.

Beyond engaging with central bank policy, cooperatives could proactively
establish relationships with cooperative-friendly financial institutions
from inception. Creating mutual aid agreements with other cooperatives
for emergency lending and shared resources could provide an alternative
to traditional financial power structures. These relationships should be
built before they're needed - the time to establish credit lines is
before facing potential predatory pricing from competitors.

Cooperatives could also work to create cooperative-centered financial
institutions (also suggested earlier, in Section 5, and in footnote 29).
Many essential social services (like kindergartens, elder care, and
Linux) cannot generate sufficient revenue for conventional loan
repayment, even with cross-subsidization from more profitable
cooperative ventures. This is not a flaw in these goods and services -
it reflects their fundamental nature as public goods that shouldn't be
subject to market logic.

Rather than treating this as a problem to be solved through creative
financial engineering or alternative currencies, cooperative banks could
embrace their potential role as interfaces between public funding and
social provisioning. A cooperative bank could:

[arabic]
. {blank}
+
____
Act as a conduit for public funding, using its chartered status and
regulatory compliance infrastructure to efficiently channel public
resources toward social needs
____
. {blank}
+
____
Provide transparent accounting and democratic oversight of how public
resources and funds are used, ensuring accountability to both government
agencies and local communities
____
. {blank}
+
____
Document the real economic value created by social services, without
requiring them to meet impossible profitability targets
____
. {blank}
+
____
Structure the financial flows to maximize social benefit rather than
financial return
____
. {blank}
+
____
Complement rather than replace public funding, while improving its
democratic character
____

This approach recognizes that the real constraints on social services
are not financial but material - the availability of skilled workers,
suitable facilities, and necessary supplies. When these real resources
exist, the role of a cooperative bank is not to make social services
"profitable" but to facilitate their provision through a combination of
public funding and democratic governance.

Rather than trying to replicate traditional banking's focus on
self-amortizing loans and profit generation, cooperative banks could
pioneer new forms of hybrid public-cooperative finance. By interfacing
between public funding sources and cooperative service providers, they
can help build a more democratic economy that truly serves social
needs.footnote:[Just as William Edwards Deming in Japan showed how
letting workers stop the production line to address defects led to
better manufacturing processes (Steve Keen & Phil Dobbie, Co-ops change
the game, Debunking Economics Podcast, Oct 19, 2024), cooperative banks
could empower their workers to identify and address systemic issues in
banking practices. As Keen notes, when workers in Japanese factories
could stop the line, "The worker explains what's failing... and then the
idea gets implemented, the worker gets a bonus out of it, and even
people working in a production line found their jobs interesting." This
principle of worker empowerment and process improvement could be adapted
to banking operations.]

Software cooperatives might leverage international recognition and
support when advocating nationally. The United Nations and the
International Labour Organization (ILO) recognize cooperatives. ILO
Recommendation 193 on the Promotion of Cooperatives provides a framework
for governments to develop supportive policies for
cooperativesfootnote:[ICA, Guidance Notes to the Co-operative
Principles,
<https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA[[.underline]#https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA#]>,
p 49, 2015.].

Cooperatives should also engage proactively with antitrust policy to
ensure a level playing field and recognition of their unique structure.
They should advocate for antitrust frameworks that distinguish between
coordination among workers or small producers and anticompetitive
behavior by large corporations. This could involve pushing for safe
harbor provisions that allow cooperatives to engage in certain forms of
coordination without triggering antitrust scrutiny, provided they meet
specific criteria for democratic ownership and control. (We will revisit
this idea below in section 21.) Cooperatives could also advocate for a
more nuanced approach to vertical integrationfootnote:[The cooperative
could approach vertical integration differently from traditional tech
giants, emphasizing openness, transparency, and democratic control. This
could involve creating federations of specialized cooperatives across
the tech stack, using open standards and protocols for all integrations,
and ensuring major integration decisions involve the entire membership.
The cooperative could maintain a modular architecture to prevent
lock-in. This approach could transform vertical integration from a tool
of monopolistic control into a means of building a resilient, efficient,
accountable, and mutually supportive technological ecosystem.] in
democratically-owned entities, arguing that traditional concerns about
market power may not apply in the same way to cooperative structures.
Furthermore, they could propose new metrics for assessing market
competition that go beyond consumer prices to consider factors like
worker welfare, community impact, and long-term innovation. Cooperatives
could help shape an antitrust regime that fosters a more diverse and
democratic economy.

[arabic, start=21]
. {blank}
+
____
Market Governance, Legal Framework, and Enterprise Survival
____

A viable software cooperative needs three foundational elements. First,
it needs market governance mechanisms that enable stable operations
without monopolistic practices. Second, it needs technical
implementations that support democratic control and federation. Third,
it needs legal frameworks that protect cooperative structures while
ensuring compliance. How could these elements work together to create a
resilient democratic organization?

First, consider price stability. Lee (2017) identifies price competition
as the "most important form of potential instability in a
market."footnote:[Lee at 154] When prices fall below costs, enterprises
fail. Yet price coordination can violate antitrust law. The cooperative
must therefore create legitimate, transparent mechanisms for stable
price formation. This means documenting internal costing methodology,
implementing democratic processes for determining profit margins, and
establishing clear price adjustment procedures.

The cooperative must also maintain itself as a "going concern" through
continuous cycles of production. This requires three key financial
practices: working capital management, cost structure analysis, and
growth planning. The cooperative needs sufficient reserves,
relationships with cooperative financial institutions, and buffer funds
for market fluctuations. Regular review of enterprise average total
costs at budgeted capacity (EATC~B~) informs both operational decisions
and long-term technology investments.

External market pressures incentivize market management through two core
strategies: institutional relationships and technical federation. To
understand these strategies, we must first understand market governance.
As Tankus & Herrine (2022) explain, "markets must develop and
maintain—they must reproduce—institutions to manage quotidian threats to
stability." When a software cooperative participates in ForgeFed or
similar federation protocols, it is not just making a technical choice.
It is helping build market governance institutions that support
democratic enterprises.

The first core strategy, institutional relationships, involves
participating in what Lee terms "market governance organizations" -
particularly software industry trade associations and technical
standards bodies. The cooperative could engage with these organizations
to maintain space for democratic approaches. For example, when HashiCorp
changed Terraform's license, they demonstrated how market or investor
pressures can force changes that harm the software commons. To resist
such pressures, a cooperative can work with open source advocacy
organizations in three ways: (a) assigning copyright to them as a
mechanism of self-restraint; (b) leveraging their legal teams to defend,
e.g., AGPL implementations; and (c) participating in standard-setting to
ensure democratic values are represented.

The second core strategy involves technical federation through open
protocols and shared infrastructure. This requires directing profits
toward developing independent tools and infrastructure. ForgeFed
exemplifies this approach. As an ActivityPub extension for software
forges, it enables federation between different code collaboration
platforms. Users can interact across different hosting sites without
creating multiple accounts. This transcends the traditional dichotomy
between centralization on profit-oriented platforms and isolated
independent hosting.

These cooperative structures must operate within specific legal
frameworks that both constrain and enable democratic governance. The
Capper-Volstead Act of 1922 provides an instructive historical
precedent: just as farmers needed collective power to avoid being
crushed between powerful railroads and processors, today's software
workers need collective power to avoid being squeezed between various
platform monopolies.

These mechanisms must operate within the "firm exemption" identified by
legal scholar Sanjukta Paul - coordinating economic activity within the
cooperative structure while avoiding illegal price fixing across firm
boundaries. The pricing reflects direct labor costs, infrastructure,
professional development, buffer fund contributions, and research
allocations.

Unlike traditional tech firms chasing exponential growth and
monopolistic positions, the cooperative could structure its finances for
sustainable steady-state operation with moderate surpluses. This reduces
capital requirements while building long-term resilience.

The strategy balances immediate survival needs with long-term
transformation goals. This requires clear documentation of internal
price formation, transparent governance processes, and regular (or
perhaps real-time, via the ensemble pattern) legal review of practices.
We aim to demonstrate that enterprises can compete effectively while
building toward a more democratic economy.

[arabic, start=22]
. {blank}
+
____
Challenges
____

While mob programming and rotating leadership roles can help maintain
democratic values in a software cooperative, dilution or co-optation of
cooperative principles will probably be a persistent
threat.footnote:[Schneider (2018) discusses examples of cooperatives
facing such challenges, from rural electric cooperatives becoming
increasingly detached from their member-owners to credit unions
operating more like traditional banks.] Moreover, the software
cooperative faces fundamental market challenges when competing with
established tech giants, particularly regarding sequential production
and capital requirements. Traditional firms can sustain losses during
market downturns using reserves accumulated through earlier monopolistic
practices. A cooperative must build comparable resilience through
inter-cooperative networks and buffer funds.

Lee's (2017) production analysis techniques offer ways to refine our
processes while maintaining democratic principles. However, Goodhart's
law warns that "When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good
measure." Over-reliance on specific metrics like pricing formulas or
productivity measures could undermine cooperative values. To mitigate
these risks, cooperatives could develop flexible evaluation systems that
consider multiple factors and are less susceptible to manipulation -
looking beyond traditional financial metrics. The ICA emphasizes that
cooperatives work for the “sustainable development of their
communities.”footnote:[ICA, Statement on the Co-operative Identity,
<https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA[[.underline]#https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA#]>,
p ii, 2015.]

Developing effective collaborative financial practices presents unique
challenges. Moving toward more collaborative financial work requires
understanding both democratic ideals and practical constraints.

Tool Development Challenges:

* {blank}
+
____
Existing financial software assumes individual rather than collaborative
work
____
* {blank}
+
____
Financial tools must maintain clear audit trails
____
* {blank}
+
____
Regulatory compliance features need to support rather than hinder
teamwork
____
* {blank}
+
____
New tools must evolve based on actual practice rather than theoretical
design
____

Regulatory Compliance Challenges:

* {blank}
+
____
Individual accountability requirements must be maintained
____
* {blank}
+
____
Audit trails must clearly show decision ownership
____
* {blank}
+
____
Regulatory bodies may be skeptical of novel approaches
____
* {blank}
+
____
Compliance documentation must adapt to collaborative work
____
* {blank}
+
____
Professional liability considerations must be addressed
____

Cultural Development Challenges:

* {blank}
+
____
Traditional financial roles may resist collaborative approaches
____
* {blank}
+
____
Teaching/learning must be balanced with operational needs
____
* {blank}
+
____
Clear accountability must coexist with collective responsibility
____
* {blank}
+
____
Trust must be built gradually through demonstrated success
____

These challenges suggest an incremental approach, grounded in Lee's
analysis of how accounting procedures are “relatively enduring
structure[s]”footnote:[Lee at 81] essential to enterprise survival. They
provide “an important way of representing economic facts to
management”footnote:[Id.] and “give social coherence and meaning to
organizational behavior.”footnote:[Id.] As we also discussed earlier in
section X, by experimenting incrementally while maintaining traditional
methods, the cooperative could develop new collaborative practices
without endangering its status as a going concern.

The experience of surgical teams and aircraft crews shows that intensive
real-time collaboration can coexist with clear individual accountability
in high-stakes environments. However, these models evolved over decades
of practical experience. We expect collaborative financial practices to
require patience and persistence in development. The key is maintaining
democratic principles while acknowledging that effective implementations
must emerge from practical experience rather than theoretical design.

With these practical challenges in mind, participatory decision-making
in cooperatives could manifest as a system of rotating leadership roles,
fostering skill development and power distribution among members.
Supermajority-based approaches for major decisions could ensure all
voices are heard, while clear processes for proposal development and
implementation could maintain efficiency.footnote:[To protect against
potential manipulation of democratic processes, implementing cooling-off
periods could be beneficial. These would involve waiting periods between
joining the cooperative and gaining full voting rights, as well as
between proposing a change and voting on it. Such measures can prevent
"raid" scenarios where threat actors might coordinate to force through a
particular decision. This approach, inspired by blockchain governance
mechanisms, (e.g. Vitalik Buterin, Proof of Stake: The Making of
Ethereum and the Philosophy of Blockchains. Seven Stories Press, 2022 at
275) balances the cooperative's commitment to democratic participation
with the need to ensure that decision-making power is held by those with
a genuine, long-term stake in the cooperative's success.]

Tension between cooperative ideals and practical compromises is a
recurring theme in cooperative historyfootnote:[Schneider, 2018],
although the definition of “practicality” is debatable.footnote:[From
the vantage point of this relatively affluent US worker in the year
2024, concerns on the part of Mondragón managers in 1988 about the
impracticality of the 4.5:1 pay ratio maximum seem outlandish.
Educational resources in my admittedly privileged context are so
abundant that professional skill development is limited only by
imagination — and so vacancies should be fillable via internal hiring.]
The key seems to be in making these decisions transparently and
democratically, always with an eye towards preserving the cooperative's
core mission and values. The ICA notes that larger cooperatives often
develop multi-tiered democratic structures.footnote:[ICA, Guidance Notes
to the Co-operative Principles,
<https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA[[.underline]#https://perma.cc/Y2RE-3MUA#]>,
p 62, 2015.] In addition, digital tools might facilitate democratic
participation at scale.

Software cooperatives should conduct production analysis by examining
their methods, cost structures, and efficiency - both at the
shop/team/ensemble level and at more-general enterprise levels. This
could include analyzing collective productivity, assessing development
methodologies, and evaluating costs of tools and infrastructure. By
tracking metrics like the EATC~B~, cooperatives can make informed
decisions about pricing, resource allocation, and investments in
research and development.

Although it would be a mistake to scale immediately, keeping scale in
mind seems prudent. This could involve developing modular architectures,
implementing clear processes for onboarding new worker-owners, and
creating standardized but flexible governance models.

[arabic, start=23]
. {blank}
+
____
Unpredictability
____

Despite its democratic structure, the cooperative will probably face
internal conflicts and power imbalances. Complex responsive processes
theoryfootnote:[Stacey & Mowles at 402. Power imbalances might arise
from differences in nationality, wealth, gender, race, expertise,
tenure, or personal charisma (Ibid at 349).] recognizes that power is a
structural characteristic of all relationships and argues that conflict
is an inherent part of organizational life. Within such complex patterns
of interaction, bureaucratic accumulation - as Graeber
arguedfootnote:[Bullshit Jobs at xxi] - often emerges as both a response
to and generator of organizational challenges. The following strategies
could help make the best of such challenges:

[arabic]
. {blank}
+
____
Power audits: Conduct periodic assessments of informal power structures
within the cooperative, identifying emerging centers of disproportionate
influence.
____
. {blank}
+
____
MVP requirement to prevent bureaucratic bloat: new systems would prove
their value through working demonstrations; the same people proposing
must implement; no specialized positions are created for new
initiatives; and resources come from existing work time, making it
difficult to ignore the trade-offs.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Mandatory inter-ensemble rotation to prevent bureaucratic entrenchment:
no system can survive solely through its creators' advocacy; fresh
perspectives regularly challenge assumptions; knowledge distribution
prevents expertise-hoarding; and status would not accumulate around
system "ownership"
____
. {blank}
+
____
Ensemble Programming to enable continuous reality-testing: impractical
processes become immediately apparent; multiple perspectives catch
unnecessary complexity; and knowledge transfers naturally through
collaboration
____
. {blank}
+
____
Rotating facilitation: In addition to rotating between source code
teams, implement a system of rotating facilitation roles in meetings and
decision-making processes to prevent the consolidation of procedural
power.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Anonymous feedback: Implement secure, anonymous channels for members to
voice concerns about power imbalances or conflicts without fear of
repercussion.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Transparency: Maintain access to all decision-making processes and
financial information for all members.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Journal club for interdisciplinary articles of interest, with a
Starbucks™ gift card for whenever somebody finds an article with at
least 1 citation to Foucault _and_ everybody reads that article ahead of
time.
____

These mechanisms create what we might call "institutional impermanence"
- nothing can become permanent unless it repeatedly proves its value to
new groups of people over time. When organizational structures must
constantly rejustify their existence to fresh eyes, bureaucratic
accumulation finds few footholds.

The key is that these aren't just policies - they're structural
safeguards that make bureaucratic accumulation physically difficult.
Just as a well-designed building naturally guides foot traffic in
certain directions, our goal is structures that naturally guide
organizational evolution away from unnecessary complexity.

Cooperative culture should tend to treat unexpected developments as
opportunities rather than threats.footnote:[Stacey & Mowles at 191: “For
Mintzberg, learning is trial-and-error…”] This could involve:

[arabic]
. {blank}
+
____
Flexible governance structures.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Encouraging experimentation and viewing 'failures' as valuable learning
experiences.
____
. {blank}
+
____
Maintaining loose boundaries between the cooperative and _friendly and
kindred elements_ of its environment, allowing for co-evolution with
broader ecosystems.
____

Democratic ideals will face ongoing challenges in practice. Actively
engaging with these issues could create a more resilient and democratic
organization that sublimates emerging power dynamics rather than ignores
them.

[arabic, start=24]
. {blank}
+
____
Determination
____

*Untitled Co-Op is going to be primarily worker-owned and
worker-controlled, and it is going to do a lot of remote mob
programming.*

We should remunerate workers based on how many hours they worked (within
health and safety limits), not when in the “hype cycle” they worked
them.footnote:[This compensation policy would apply specifically to
worker-members. For worker-members, everyone would receive the same
hourly wage and the same rate of equity distribution (although any
dividend payouts would be proportional to equity held). User-members
would have a different incentive structure, potentially including
patronage dividends, usage-based benefits, or a distinct class of
membership shares. This approach aims to balance fair compensation for
workers with meaningful engagement for users, while maintaining the
cooperative's core principles. This policy draws partial inspiration
from Mondragón and partial inspiration from Oxide Computer Company
(https://web.archive.org/web/20240927021311/https://oxide.computer/blog/compensation-as-a-reflection-of-values/).]
(And managers are workers too - no more and no less!) Business ownership
should be distributed according to each worker’s contribution of time,
provided it is made in good faith. This approach is both more fair and
more fun. It incentivizes the success of the team, not just atomized
individuals. By limiting ownership of first-class shares to natural
persons and stake size to only what could be accrued by the hours
contributed by a natural person, we avoid overly-powerful actors that
would undermine democracy.footnote:[Like the 'unMonastery' experiment
that sought to apply monastic principles to modern tech challenges
(Schneider, 2018), we seek to bridge past and present in creating a more
democratic future.] We should study network effects and how to use them
to facilitate widespread human flourishing. Cooperatives need to
explicitly and constitutively reflect on how their formal and informal
structures and patterns affect behavior, ideas, and engagement of their
members. Cooperatives can embody democratic values, encourage care, and
build a sense of shared destiny — a plurality of commons where together
we shape our worlds through words and deeds.
